---
title: 'Exploring the power of static typing'
publishedAt: '2022-06-07'
author: 'Aelpxy'
summary: 'There's a long debate about static and dynamic typing in the world of software. But, I think static typing is superior.'
---

## Why should you care?

The developers who write dynamic languages always argue how easy it is to get
started. However, once they start using statically typed languages, it's
actually hard for them get back into dynamic languages. Languages like
JavaScript, Python (Python has Typehints for typesafety), and many others don't
care about type safety and thus can throw really bad runtime errors if not
handled correctly.

While TypeScript is indeed a superset of JavaScript, it does type checking
during compile time, which in fact reduces the chances of a runtime error.
Modern languages like Rust and Go focus strictly on type safety (PS. Go isn't as
strict as Rust).

If you want to build solid software, static languages should be considered.
While many may argue that a lot of companies are using dynamic languages, and I
agree with them, they in fact do, but why would you want to waste time debugging
instead of just catching it during development? Doesn't it save more time than
having to debug in production?

## Preventing errors

One of the benefits of static typing is its ability to catch errors during the
development time, rather than at runtime. In dynamically typed languages, it's
possible to write code that compiles and runs without any issues, only to
encounter unexpected errors at runtime due to type mismatches or other issues.
This can lead to frustrating debugging sessions and costly production issues.
With static typing, the compiler can perform type checking during the
compilation, identifying and reporting these types of errors before the code is
even executed. This allows to address problems early in the development process,
saving time and reducing the risk of bugs making it to production.

The problem:

```javascript
const user = await getUser(id)

console.log(user)
```

Everything looks fine, right? So, where's the issue? The issue is that you don't
know what the function returns. This may not be an issue in small projects, but
once you dive deeper into larger projects, this will become a headache.

The solution:

```typescript
type UserType = 'user' | 'admin'

interface User {
  name: string
  email: string
  type: UserType
  isActive?: boolean
}

interface Error {
  message: string
  code: number
}

async function getUser(id: string): Promise<User | Error> {
  try {
    // fetch the user
    const userData = await fetchUserFromDatabase(id as string)

    if (!userData) {
      return {
        message: 'not_found',
        code: 404,
      }
    }

    return {
      name: userData.name,
      email: userData.email,
      type: userData.type,
      isActive: userData.isActive,
    }
  } catch (error) {
    return {
      message: 'internal_server_error',
      code: 500,
    }
  }
}
```

Perhaps that looks like a lot but if you trust me it will save you a lot of time
and headache in the future. Plus, you'll enjoy free autocompletion provided by
the language server.

## Improved Code Quality and Maintainability

Static typing contributes to better code quality and maintainability. By
enforcing a clear and consistent type system, static typing helps us write more
robust and reliable code. The type annotations provide valuable documentation,
making it easier for other team members to understand and work with the
codebase.

## Conclusion

Initially, the setup may look like a lot of work, but once you get used to it,
it's an investment that will definitely pay off in the long run. You will thank
yourself in the future for taking the time to get this right. (Not joking - I'm
a victim of this myself.)
